---
title: Building better portfolios
author: Nicole Calzavara
published: 2026-05-22T20:37-0400
---


<h1>What is your portfolio for?</h1>
For 6 years I've participated directly in portfolio reviews, design education in classroom and guest speaker capacities and virtual consultations with students and professionals. I've spoken to dozens of students individually, and joined student organizations for industrial designers to speak to groups of students and provide detailed review and critique of portfolios. I've led classroom discussions as an educator, and held individual reviews as a friend. 
<br>
I've seen a LOT of portfolios, and there are a number of repeat lessons that I voice to the students and professionals that I speak to about a variety of topics. This article hosts the key learnings that I've found to be the strongest advice to take a generic portfolio of any level, and turn it to an impact-driving tool for success.

<h2>Message: The lost detail in portfolio evolutions</h2>
I tend to ask others often "What is the purpose of your portfolio?".<br>It's pretty common that creatives will make a catch-all bucket that shows all their best work in one place, enabling them to show it off to others in the hopes of finding accolades and employment. Now, with the increase of tools like AI and prompt-driven design, anyone can get a portfolio of Dribble-grade work within a short period of time. So the question remains <br> <h3>What is your portfolio for?</h3>

There are a many different parts to this answer that come into play, but I'd like to draw focus to a few key focuses to orbit around.<br>
<ul>
<li><h4>Your portfolio shows your domain.</h4>If you have a specific goal in mind for your career, chances are this goal is what you want to orbit around. A domain is a specific sector of work (Healthcare, UX, Automotive, Fashion) that you want to showcase your skills within. It's the opportunity to show a diverse range of capabilities and knowledge within an area of expertise.<br><br>Focusing on domain means not having projects in your portfolio that pull too far away from it, and focusing on a cohesive message beyond just "You work in automotive". For example, showing 3 furniture products and one home goods project shows a consideration for space and environment if paired and showcased together in example rooms or living spaces. Having half healthcare products and half sports products works well for someone trying to build a portfolio in athletic design.
<li><h4>Your portfolio shows your talents.</h4>If you're more generic and don't focus on one area, it's important not too give every reader the kitchen sink with each project you showcase. WHY are you sharing the piece in your portfolio? Consider each project shown to have a focal point. One project specializes in the relationship you had with a client, while another talks about detailed technical constraints. Overall, they show proficiency in multiple domains. <br><br> Don't skimp on the overall details for projects, but highlighting focus areas and spending 10-15% more content on them shows diversity in case studies and breaks up monotony.
<li><h4>Your portfolio shows your best work.</h4>If you're truly just new to design and don't have a history, or you've built a lot of product and are trying to show your best work, sometimes <b>less is more</b>. Attempting to show every good project and none of the bad never works. Aim to have a small, curated list you can slowly replace as your work improves, to titrate the time working on your portfolio.
</ul>

<h2>Pitfalls: Where portfolios get caught up</h2>
Among the feedback I've shared to students and professionals alike is a lot of repeatedly mentioning the same challenges everyone, myself included, has done with their portfolios. It's about the HOW we show our work over the WHAT, and these problems are the ones that once you review them and try to avoid them, can have dramatically strong impacts in the readability and success of showing your work.

<ul>
<li><h4>You aren't thinking of the audience.</h4>Unfortunately, designers are not the only people reviewing design portfolios. There is a gauntlet of different readers, reviewers, recruiters, and automated systems that have to go through your portfolio in many modern hiring businesses, before anyone who can evaluate if you have skill can see it. Deeply consider that <b>your portfolio IS a design object</b> and focusing on a smooth reading experience, limited page content that shows the crucial details early and allows further reading later, and web-friendly content displays means a lot to those reading about your work.<br><br><i>Replace pages made from uploaded powerpoints with images and text separated. Consider accessibility and page resizing on different devices. Add a front-loaded summary of your successes and WHY you did this project.</i>
<li><h4>Your portfolio pieces lacks cohesion.</h4>The very information shown in your portfolio should have a user experience to it. Beyond picture-image-picture-image layouts, we need to consider how information is delivered. As humans, when we acquire information we slowly build familiarity with the premise and structure through logic and understanding.So when delivering a story about your new web-app, physical device or service, we need to expect that the reader doesn't know the basic information or proper-nouns we used abundantly.<br><br> <i>Deliver information gradually to build on top of previously established concepts. Curve balls or information dumps only make projects harder to read. Think of explaining the product to the client, not the</i>
<li><h4>Your portfolio isn't an archive.</h4>Don't treat your portfolio as a dumping ground for your work! It isn't the home to showcase everything you've done in a single location to be "proof" of talent, but a curated article that expresses your unique talent. It should contain your style, your ideas and message about how you want to use design. And if that means being the best stuffed-animal fabricator, industrial waterjet cutter interface designer, or sexual health demonstration aid creator then you need to own it! <br><br> <i>Don't just post your student projects and thesis to Squarespace. Don't just upload and be done. Make a statement with your work even if it takes time, employers DO notice.</i>
</ul>


<h2>Do it better because you can.</h2>
You have an opportunity to make a summation of the best possible skills, message, aesthetic and direction you can with the work you present in a portfolio. It's a capsule of you, a living resource that showcases your talent and accomplishments that deserves to be better than uploaded screenshots. Share it more often, work on it with your friends and colleagues, use it as a tool to host your findings and explorations, and make it better than just a collection of images designed to get you employment. <br><br>We're creatives and we should be empowered to create something that matters to us.